[LPT] Documentation (developer guide) (#7444)
openvinotoolkit/openvino: docs/low_precision_transformations_ug/pipeline/step2_markup.md

> # OpenVINO™ LPT: step #2. Markup transformations {#openvino_docs_IE_UG_lpt_step2_markup}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# OpenVINO™ LPT: Step #2. Markup Transformations {#openvino_docs_IE_UG_lpt_step2_markup}
```

> This step defines the most optimal `FakeQuantize` decomposition precisions for the best inference performance via operations markup with runtime attribute instances. Attributes are created for input & output ports and operations. Operation output port precisions are not changed in these transformations. Transformations order is important. A model markup low precision logic is decomposed and implemented into following common markup transformations (in usage order, order is important):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This step defines the optimal `FakeQuantize` decomposition precisions for the best inference performance via operations markup with runtime attribute instances. Attributes are created for input and output ports and operations. Transformations do not change the operation output port precisions. A model markup low precision logic is decomposed and implemented into the following common markup transformations. Transformations order is important:
```

Author: done, thanks

1. [MarkupCanBeQuantized](@ref openvino_docs_IE_DG_lpt_MarkupCanBeQuantized)
2. [MarkupPrecisions](@ref openvino_docs_IE_DG_lpt_MarkupPrecisions)
3. [MarkupPerTensorQuantization](@ref openvino_docs_IE_DG_lpt_MarkupPerTensorQuantization)
4. [MarkupAvgPoolPrecisionPreserved](@ref openvino_docs_IE_DG_lpt_MarkupAvgPoolPrecisionPreserved)
5. [PropagatePrecisions](@ref openvino_docs_IE_DG_lpt_PropagatePrecisions)
6. [AlignQuantizationIntervals](@ref openvino_docs_IE_DG_lpt_AlignQuantizationIntervals)
7. [AlignQuantizationParameters](@ref openvino_docs_IE_DG_lpt_AlignQuantizationParameters)

<details>

> <summary>Click to explore transformations and used attributes in one table</summary>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<summary>Click to explore the table of transformations and used attributes</summary>
```

Author: done, thanks

| Transformation name             | Create attributes             | Use attributes                            |
|---------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|
| MarkupCanBeQuantized            | Precisions                    |                                           |
| MarkupPrecisions                | Precisions,PrecisionPreserved |                                           |
| MarkupPerTensorQuantization     | PerTensorQuantization         |                                           |
| MarkupAvgPoolPrecisionPreserved | AvgPoolPrecisionPreserved     | Precisions, PrecisionPreserved            |
| PropagatePrecisions             | Precisions                    | Precisions, PrecisionPreserved            |
| AlignQuantizationIntervals      | IntervalsAlignment            | PrecisionPreserved                        |
| AlignQuantizationParameters     | QuantizationAlignment         | PrecisionPreserved, PerTensorQuantization |

</details>

> Note, please, the same type attribute instances can be created in different transformations. This approach is result of transformation single-responsibility principle. For example `Precision` attribute instances are created in `MarkupCanBeQuantized` and `MarkupPrecisions` transformations but the creation reason is different.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** the same type of attribute instances can be created in different transformations. This approach is the result of the transformation single-responsibility principle. For example, `Precision` attribute instances are created in `MarkupCanBeQuantized` and `MarkupPrecisions` transformations, but the reasons for their creation are different
```

> Common markup transformations can be decomposed to simpler utility markup transformations. Markup utility transformations (order is not important):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Common markup transformations can be decomposed into simpler utility markup transformations. The order of Markup utility transformations is not important:
```

* [CreateAttribute](@ref openvino_docs_IE_DG_lpt_CreateAttribute)
* [CreatePrecisionsDependentAttribute](@ref openvino_docs_IE_DG_lpt_CreatePrecisionsDependentAttribute)
* [PropagateThroughPrecisionPreserved](@ref openvino_docs_IE_DG_lpt_PropagateThroughPrecisionPreserved)
* [PropagateToInput](@ref openvino_docs_IE_DG_lpt_PropagateToInput)
* [UpdateSharedPrecisionPreserved](@ref openvino_docs_IE_DG_lpt_UpdateSharedPrecisionPreserved)

Let's explore all transformations and their relations in details on the same model:

![](img/step2_markup_original.png) 

The original model key features:
* The first `concat1` concatenation operation has not quantized `convolution1` consumer.

> * The second `concat2` concatenation operation has quantized `convolution2` consumer with requirements: 1) support `unsigned int8` on activations 2) per-tensor quantization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The second `concat2` concatenation operation has quantized `convolution2` consumer with requirements: 
1) support `unsigned int8` on activations 
2) per-tensor quantization
```

> * Between `concat2` concatenation operation and `Convolution` there is `AvgPool` operation which mathematically have to return `f32` tensor. But `MarkupAvgPoolPrecisionPreserved` transformation is active, which allows low precision after `AvgPool` transformation to propagate low precision tensor to the next consumer. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Between the `concat2` concatenation operation and `Convolution` there is an `AvgPool` operation, which mathematically should return an `f32` tensor. But the `MarkupAvgPoolPrecisionPreserved` transformation is active. This allows the low precision transformation, that goes after the `AvgPool`, to propagate low precision tensor to the next consumer. 
```

> Transformations are ran with parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transformations are run with the following parameters:
```

@snippet snippets/lpt_mkldnn_plugin.cpp lpt_markup_pipeline

## 1. MarkupCanBeQuantized

> The transformation marks operations which can not be quantized. The transformation doesn't require any attributes before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The transformation marks operations that cannot be quantized. No attributes are required before the transformation.
```

> Changes in example model after `MarkupCanBeQuantized` transformation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Changes in the example model after `MarkupCanBeQuantized` transformation:
```

* Not quantized `convolution1` operation is marked by `Precisions` attribute with empty values. This attribute allows to ignore not quantized operation by the next transformations.

Result model:

![MarkupCanBeQuantized](img/step2_markup1.png)

> Model display features (here and below):

> > 1. Added by current transformation attributes are marked in bold.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 1. The attributes added by the current transformation are marked in bold.
```

> > 2. If attributes are not fit into one line, then one line consists only one attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 2. If attributes do not fit into one line, then one line consists of only one attribute.
```

## 2. MarkupPrecisions
The transformation is required and include two tasks:
1. Mark operation input ports (create `Precision` attribute instance) by provided restrictions: input port index and required precisions. Restrictions are provided as input argument in `ngraph::pass::low_precision::LowPrecision` constructor. 
2. Mark precision preserved operations. 

> The transformation doesn't require any attributes before. Changes in example model after `MarkupPrecisions` transformation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No attributes are required before the transformation. Changes in the example model after `MarkupPrecisions` transformation:
```

> * Both concatenation operations are marked as precision preserved operation. It allows to propagate precision via these operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Both concatenation operations are marked as precision preserved operations. It allows to propagate precision via these operations.
```

> * Quantized `convolution2` operation is marked by `Precisions` attribute with `u8` precision on activations and `i8` precisions on weights in accordance with provided restrictions. This attribute instance allows to specify which precisions are required for quantized `Convolution` operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Quantized `convolution2` operation is marked by the `Precisions` attribute with `u8` precision on activations and `i8` precisions on weights according to the provided restrictions. This attribute instance allows to specify which precisions are required for quantized `Convolution` operation.
```

Result model:

![MarkupPrecisions result](img/step2_markup2.png)

## 3. MarkupPerTensorQuantization

> The transformation is required and marks operations (create `PerTensorQuantization` attribute instance) by provided restrictions: operation which requires per-tensor quantization. The transformation doesn't require any attributes before. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The transformation is required and marks operations (create `PerTensorQuantization` attribute instance) by provided restrictions: an operation that requires per-tensor quantization. No attributes are required before the transformation.
```

> Changes in example model after `MarkupPerTensorQuantization` transformation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Changes in the example model after `MarkupPerTensorQuantization` transformation:
```

* both `Convolution` operations are marked by `PerTensorQuantization`

Result model:

![MarkupPerTensorQuantization result](img/step2_markup3.png)

## 4. MarkupAvgPoolPrecisionPreserved

> The transformation is optional. `MarkupAvgPoolPrecisionPreserved` marks `AvgPool` operations as precision preserved or not precision preserved. `AvgPool` operation is precision preserved if next not precision preserved operation can be inferred in low precision. In other words: `AvgPool` operations became precision preserved operations to speed up model inference. The transformation uses `PrecisionPreserved` attributes created before. The transformation is combined and uses:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The transformation is optional. `MarkupAvgPoolPrecisionPreserved` marks `AvgPool` operations as precision preserved or not precision preserved. `AvgPool` operation is precision preserved if next not precision preserved operation can be inferred in low precision. In other words, `AvgPool` operations become precision preserved operations to speed up model inference. The transformation uses `PrecisionPreserved` attributes created before. The transformation is combined and uses:
```

* CreatePrecisionsDependentAttribute
* PropagateThroughPrecisionPreserved
* UpdateSharedPrecisionPreserved

> Changes in example model after `MarkupAvgPoolPrecisionPreserved` transformation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Changes in the example model after `MarkupAvgPoolPrecisionPreserved` transformation:
```

* `AvgPool` operations are marked by `PrecisionPreserved` and `AvgPoolPrecisionPreserved` (not used below).

Result model:

![MarkupAvgPoolPrecisionPreserved](img/step2_markup4.png)

## 5. PropagatePrecisions

> The transformation is required. `PropagatePrecision` is a key transformation in markup pipeline which marks `FakeQuantize` output port precisions. The transformation uses `PrecisionPreserved` attribute instances which are created before. The transformation is combined and uses:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The transformation is required. `PropagatePrecision` is a key transformation in the markup pipeline, which marks `FakeQuantize` output port precisions. The transformation uses `PrecisionPreserved` attribute instances created before. The transformation is combined and uses:
```

* CreateAttribute
* PropagateThroughPrecisionPreserved
* PropagateToInput

> Changes in example model after `PropagatePrecisions` transformation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Changes in the example model after `PropagatePrecisions` transformation:
```

> * All precision preserved operations are marked by `Precisions` attribute instance which defines required precision for the operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* All precision preserved operations are marked by the `Precisions` attribute instance, which defines the required precision for the operation.
```

* `FakeQuantize` operation output ports are marked by `Precisions` attribute instances which defines target precision for decomposition. In sample model `FakeQuantize` operations have signed intervals but `Precisions` attributes initialized by `u8` (`unsigned int8`) values as result applied during transformations restrictions for `Convolution` operations.

Result model:

![PropagatePrecisions](img/step2_markup5.png)

> `AlignQuantizationIntervals` and `AlignQuantizationParameters` transformations are required if model has quantized concatenation operations.

## 6. AlignQuantizationIntervals

> The transformation is required for models with quantized     operation. The transformation marks `FakeQuantize` operation and precision preserved consumers to combine quantization information from different `FakeQuantize` operations for future quantization intervals alignment. The transformation is combined and uses:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The transformation is required for models with the quantized operation. The transformation marks `FakeQuantize` operation and precision preserved consumers to combine quantization information from different `FakeQuantize` operations for future quantization intervals alignment. The transformation is combined and uses:
```

* CreateAttribute
* PropagateThroughPrecisionPreserved

Changes in example model after `AlignQuantizationIntervals` transformation:
* All `FakeQuantize` operation and theirs precision preserved consumers are marked by `IntervalsAlignment` attribute instance.

Result model:

![AlignQuantizationIntervals](img/step2_markup6.png)

## 7. AlignQuantizationParameters
The transformation is required for models with quantized concatenation operation. The transformation marks `FakeQuantize` precision preserved consumers to align quantization intervals. The transformation is combined and uses:
* CreateAttribute
* PropagateThroughPrecisionPreserved
* UpdateSharedPrecisionPreserved

> Changes in example model after `AlignQuantizationParameters` transformation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Changes in the example model after `AlignQuantizationParameters` transformation:
```
